# Custom Addon

Custom addons in Widgetbook offer the flexibility to tailor your development environment
according to the unique needs of your project. We will explore two examples, simple and
advanced, demonstrating the process of creating custom addons.

## Setup

To create a custom Addons, follow these steps:

- Define a model for your custom Addon. This model will hold the data and behavior of your
  Addon.
- Create a new class that extends the WidgetbookAddon class with a generic parameter
  corresponding to your defined model.

## Writing a custom Alignment Addon

Here's an example demonstrating how to create a simple Alignment Addon:

```dart
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:widgetbook/widgetbook.dart';

class AlignmentAddon extends WidgetbookAddon<Alignment> {
  AlignmentAddon({
    Alignment initialAlignment = Alignment.center,
  }) : super(
          name: 'Alignment',
          initialSetting: initialAlignment,
        );

  @override
  Widget buildUseCase(
    BuildContext context,
    Widget child,
    Alignment setting,
  ) {
    // customize how the use case is built using your custom Addon
    return Align(
      alignment: setting,
      child: child,
    );
  }

  @override
  List<Field<Alignment>> get fields {
    return [
      ListField<Alignment>(
        name: 'alignment',
        initialValue: initialSetting,
        values: [
          Alignment.topLeft,
          Alignment.topCenter,
          Alignment.topRight,
          Alignment.centerLeft,
          Alignment.center,
          Alignment.centerRight,
          Alignment.bottomLeft,
          Alignment.bottomCenter,
          Alignment.bottomRight,
        ],
      )
    ];
  }

  @override
  Alignment valueFromQueryGroup(Map<String, String> group) {
    return valueOf<Alignment>('alignment', group)!;
  }
}
```

In this example, we create a `AlignmentAddon` that manages a `Alignment` value. The
`initialSetting` is the initial state of the `Alignment` value. The fields list contains a
single `ListField` which represents the `Alignment` value managed by the addon in the
Widgetbook UI

<Image src="/assets/addons/custom-addon.png" zoom />

<Info>
  See [source
  code](https://github.com/widgetbook/widgetbook/blob/main/examples/full_example/lib/customs/custom_addon.dart)
</Info>

Let's break down the code to understand better.

```dart
class AlignmentAddon extends WidgetbookAddon<Alignment> {
```

We create a new class called `AlignmentAddon`, which extends `WidgetbookAddon`. The
`Alignment` generic indicates that this addon will handle a `Alignment` value.

```dart
class AlignmentAddon extends WidgetbookAddon<Alignment> {
  AlignmentAddon({
    Alignment initialAlignment = Alignment.center,
  }) : super(
          name: 'Alignment',
          initialSetting: initialAlignment,
        );
```

The constructor for `AlignmentAddon` takes a parameter. `initialAlignment` is `Alignment`
with default value, if provided, will be used as the initial value of the addon.

We define one final fields in the class, `alignment`, to hold the values passed in from
the constructor. You may add more fields if necessitates.

```dart
  @override
  Widget buildUseCase(
    BuildContext context,
    Widget child,
    Alignment setting,
  ) {
    return Align(
      alignment: setting,
      child: child,
    );
  }
```

The `buildUseCase` method is where we specify how the addon will affect the widget tree.
It's an abstract method from the `WidgetbookAddon` class that we need to implement. It
takes three parameters: a `BuildContext`, a Widget that is the child of this addon, and a
`Alignment` that is the current setting of the addon. For now, we wrap the child widget
with an `Align` widget that uses the setting parameter (which is the current `Alignment`
setting for this addon) as its alignment value.

```dart
    @override
  List<Field<Alignment>> get fields {
    return [
      ListField<Alignment>(
        name: 'alignment',
        initialValue: initialSetting,
        values: [
          Alignment.topLeft,
          Alignment.topCenter,
          Alignment.topRight,
          Alignment.centerLeft,
          Alignment.center,
          Alignment.centerRight,
          Alignment.bottomLeft,
          Alignment.bottomCenter,
          Alignment.bottomRight,
        ],
      )
    ];
  }

```

The fields getter is where we specify the fields that will represent the addon in the
Widgetbook UI. Each field corresponds to an input field in the UI. In this case, we have a
single `ListField` with an initial value of `initialSetting` and values of possible
alignments for `Align` widget.

```dart
  @override
  Alignment valueFromQueryGroup(Map<String, String> group) {
    return valueOf<Alignment>('alignment', group) ?? initialSetting;
  }
```

Lastly, the `valueFromQueryGroup` method is overridden. This method is responsible for
generating a new `Alignment` setting for the addon from the URL's query parameters. It
uses the helper method `valueOf` to extract the `Alignment` value associated with the
'alignment' key from the group map. If the value is not found (i.e., it's null), it falls
back to the `initialSetting`.

Congratulation! you have managed to created your first custom Addon that wraps `Align`
widget. So now, nothing cannot stop you to write what your project need.

## Field Types in Widgetbook

For more detailed information, visit the [Field Types page](/field-types).
